---
title: "On the conceptual complexity for non-point source management: Impact of spatial variability"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-03-12-Henri-et-al
excerpt: ''
date: 2020-03-12
venue: 'Hydrology and Earth System Sciences'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-24-1189-2020'
citation: 'Henri, C.V., Harter, T., Diamantopoulos, E., On the conceptual complexity for non-point source management: Impact of spatial variability, Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 24, 1189–1209'
---
Non-point source (NPS) pollution has degraded groundwater quality of unconsolidated sedimentary basins over many decades. Properly conceptualizing NPS pollution from the well scale to the regional scale leads to complex and expensive numerical models: key controlling factors of NPS pollution – recharge rate, leakage of pollutants, and soil and aquifer hydraulic properties – are spatially and, for recharge and pollutant leakage, temporally variable. This leads to high uncertainty in predicting well pollution. On the other hand, concentration levels of some key NPS contaminants (salinity, nitrate) vary within a limited range (< 2 orders of magnitude), and significant mixing occurs across the aquifer profile along the most critical compliance surface: drinking water wells with their extended vertical screen length. Given these two unique NPS contamination conditions, we here investigate the degree to which NPS travel time to wells and the NPS source area associated with an individual well can be appropriately captured, for practical applications, when spatiotemporally variable recharge, contaminant leakage rates, or hydraulic conductivity are represented through a sub-regionally homogenized parametrization. We employ a Monte Carlo- based stochastic framework to assess the impact of model homogenization on key management metrics for NPS contamination. Results indicate that travel time distributions are relatively insensitive to the spatial variability of recharge and contaminant loading, while capture zone and contaminant time series exhibit some sensitivity to source variability. In contrast, homogenization of aquifer heterogeneity significantly affects the uncertainty assessment of travel times and capture zone delineation. Surprisingly, the statistics of relevant NPS well concentrations (fast and intermediate travel times) are fairly well reproduced by a series of equivalent homogeneous aquifers, highlighting the dominant role of NPS solute mixing along well screens.
